---
layout: article
title: "Recovery after injury"
description: "Completed a meta-analysis of EQ-5D assessed recovery after injury combining three thirds of the known study data."
modified: 2014-01-10
image: 
  thumb: paper1_thumb.jpg
  homepage: paper1_thumb.jpg
categories: papers
toc: true
tags: [papers, publications, hrqol]
comments: true
---

## Background

This is one of two papers that came from my Masters in Public Health thesis. In my thesis,
 I attempted to model what a normal recovery curve looked like after different types of 
 injuries.

## Abstract

**Background**: General information of health-related quality of life pathways to recovery
 after injury are largely absent from the literature. This article describes a study which: 
 (1) collated and synthesized individual patient data of injured persons from an earlier 
 systematic review and (2) produced general predictions of health-related quality of life 
 for different injury groups for up to 1 year postinjury. 
 
**Methods**: A systematic search of literature from January 1990 to December 2008 was completed.
 Researchers were approached to share their anonymous individual level data. Injuries 
 were grouped into 39 categories based on the Eurocost injury classifications. Multilevel 
 mixed effects models were used to produce predictions across both the five dimensions 
 and the visual analog scale of the EQ-5D measure at 3 days, 30 days, 120 days, and 
 360 days postinjury. 
 
**Results**: Individual patient data from 10,496 injured persons 
 (76% of known data worldwide) was retrieved. Predictions were fitted to 27 of the 39 
 injury categories covering a wide spectrum of injury types. Across most injuries, 
 pain, or discomfort, usual activities and mobility were the most commonly impaired 
 dimensions. Recovery for pain or discomfort was generally more gradual than other health 
 dimensions. For many injury categories, a consid- erable proportion of people reported 
 residual impairment at 360 days. Regardless of the anatomic location of injury, 
 similar patterns of recovery or persistent impairment were seen for fractures and strains/sprains. 
 Recovery patterns differed and took much longer than estimated in the Global Burden of Disease Study. 
 
**Conclusions**: This study has produced recovery patterns for 27 injury groups using most of
 the worldwide individual-level data. For many injury catego- ries, recovery is 
 incomplete and takes much longer than estimated. This study infers that the burden of 
 injury is likely being underestimated.

## Reference

*Black, J. A., Herbison, G. P., Lyons, R. A., Polinder, S., & Derrett, S.* (2011). 
**Recovery after injury: an individual patient data meta-analysis of 
general health status using the EQ-5D.** 
The Journal of trauma, 71(4), 1003–10. doi:10.1097/TA.0b013e3182238833

