---
layout: media
title: "Simpson's paradox in diabetes"
categories: blog
tags: [javascript, d3, simpson's paradox]
excerpt: "Using the D3 javascript library to visualise Simpson's paradox."
ads: false
toc: true
comments: true
share: true
image:
  feature: simpsons_feature.jpeg
  teaser: simpsons_thumb.gif
  #credit: Herneman
  #creditlink: http://herneman.blogspot.co.uk
---

## Definition

For the month of July (2014) I'll be teaching medical science for a summer school in my college.
 Over the last week I've started to put together the slides I'll be using. To help explain 
 the concept of Simpson's paradox I played around with rejigging somebody else's code 
 to fit the context of diabetes (my research area). The code used to make 
 the plots below was originally written by the [Vudlab at UC Berkeley](http://vudlab.com/simpsons/).
 
I'll let wikipedia give an introduction to the Simpson's paradox,
 
> Simpson's paradox, or the Yule–Simpson effect, is a paradox in which a trend that appears in different groups of data disappears when these groups are combined, and the reverse trend appears for the aggregate data.

## Example

David Spiegelhalter, an academic who's work I admire, contributed ideas
 to a paper on Simpson's paradox that was published in the BMJ.[^1] One of the examples used 
 in the paper was from the Poole diabetes cohort. The researchers broke a group of people with diabetes 
 into two groups. One required insulin (usually type 1 diabetes), the other sub-group didn't (type 2 diabetes).
 
They followed the two groups, and found that those with insulin dependent diabetes were 31% **less**
 likely (95%CI 46% to 13%) to have died during the follow up. Yet when the adjusted for 
 age, the association flipped and those with insulin dependent diabetes were 15% **more** likely 
 to have died (*statistically non-significant*, 95%CI -9% to 46%).

## The population

Below, each dot represents an individual from the study. Red have 
 insulin dependent diabetes. Blue have non-insulin dependent diabetes.

<iframe width="650" height="260" src="http://epijim.uk/simpsons/all.html" frameborder="0" ></iframe>

## Insulin dependent diabetes

In the next plot is just the people with insulin dependent diabetes. In this group 29% of
 people died (those that died are the red dots). 

<iframe width="650" height="260" src="http://epijim.uk/simpsons/insulin.html" frameborder="0" ></iframe>

## Non-insulin dependent diabetes

And in the next plot is the people with non-insulin dependent diabetes. In this group 40% died
 during follow up. So it looks like people are more likely to die with non-insulin dependent 
 diabetes! This really doesn't make sense, as insulin dependent diabetes is usually assumed 
 to be a more serious manifestation of the disease (insulin is a last resort in type 2 diabetes).

<iframe width="650" height="260" src="http://epijim.uk/simpsons/noninsulin.html" frameborder="0" ></iframe>

## Interactive example

The last plot below shows how the variable age helps explain what is happening. *Hitting the green
 button will make the individuals move between groups.* 
 
This paradox occurs because people are more
 more likely to get type 2 diabetes later in life. People are also more likely to die later in 
 in life. So not accounting for the age difference in the people with the two conditions 
 means you can come to the wrong conclusions.

<iframe width="650" height="500" src="http://epijim.uk/simpsons/index.html" frameborder="0" ></iframe>

I'm planning on including these plots in my slides (the joy of HTML5 slides is being able to
 to bring in amazing plot libraries like D3).

[^1]: BMJ 1994;309:1480